---
layout: post
title: "Metal Graphics API" 
date: 2021-05-18
---
It is a brief summary of Metal Graphics API.

## GPU Work Submission
- **Command Queue**
  - It is **a little** like **Device Context** in D3D11.
  - It is thread safe, much fit for multi-threading environment.
  - Command Buffer can be encoded by different encoders serially. So a Command Buffer may contain render commands, compute commands, blit commands ?  I think so. render encoder, close.  Then BlitEncoder, close.
- **Command Buffer**
  - It encodes and packs "GPU Commands" explicitly by a "Command Encoder".
  - Each thread can have its own "Command Buffer" and operates on it.
  - command buffer has a **addCompletedHandler** interface to add call back function which is called when command buffer completed execution.
  - Can **Command Buffer** be reused after submitted ?  It seems not in Metal.
- **Command Encoder**
  - It is used to encode **GPU commands** into buffer. It has its own scope. That means :
    - bound resource in current encoder, no need to rebind before draw.
    - bound resource in other encoder, not affect current encoder.
  - Render Command Encoder is created from Command Buffer by a Render Pass descriptor.
  - For Compute and Blit command Encoder, there is no such constraints. Because they are independent of Rendering.
  - Render Command Encoder is 1:1 map to "A Render Pass". 
  - Render Command Encoder can only be created serially except of Parallel Render command Encoder.
  - That is you cannot create a new one  until close the current one. The possible sequence is as follow.
    - create encoder
    - encoder GPU commands
    - endEncoding
    - create new encoder
  - Render Command Encoder contains an implicit "ClearColor" command. 
  - Clear operation is very different with other Graphics library. 
    - That is Encoder has no explicit clear command to use. It must set it by a Render Pass descriptor.
- **MTLRenderPassDescriptor**
  - It is used to create "Render Command Encoder" from commandBuffer by API **renderCommandEncoderWithDescriptor()**
  - It is a description of output of a Render Pass. There is **NO** counterpart in D3D11.
  - What role does it play in rendering process ?
    - It contains color attachment array, depth attachment and stencil attachment. 
    - Sample position operations of Multi-Sample technique. It gives a way to do custom MSAA. Does D3D provide API to do these things ? 
    - Layered Rendering, Tile Shading 
    - Visibility Result buffer. How this buffer is written and queried ?
## Render Pipeline State (PSO) in Metal
- **MTLRenderPipelineDescriptor** is used to create **MTLRenderPipelineState** object from device.
  - calling *newRenderPipelineStateWithDescriptor* to create **MTLRenderPipelineState** .
  - Vertex function, Fragment function. How about tessellation and geometry stage ?
      - D3D11 compiles source code into byte code, then generates shader objects from byte code.
      - D3D11 binds different Shader objects to  different stages at run time.
  - Vertex layout description
  - Rasterizer sample count For MSAA
  - color attachment description array, depth format, stencil format. 
    - D3D11 use Resource View: RTV, DSV, SRV / CBV / UAV.
  - Tessellation related settings.
  - MTLPipelineBufferDescriptorArray, what is this ?

- **MTLDepthStencilDescriptor && MTLDepthStencilState** 
  - create **MTLDepthStencilState** object from device by MTLDepthStencilDescriptor to represent Depth Stencil state to GPU.
  - [MTLDepthStencilDescriptor](https://developer.apple.com/documentation/metal/mtldepthstencildescriptor?language=objc)
    - depthWriteEnabled, Whether to enalbe write to depth attachment.
    - depthCompareFunction, How to compare current fragment's z with that in depth attachment.
    - backFace and frontFace Stencil state. see details [here](https://developer.apple.com/documentation/metal/mtlstencildescriptor?language=objc). It explains How stencil value are compared and updated. It is a bit complicated.
  - DepthStecnil buffer **must be** a private ressource. Is it true in D3D12 ?  
    - It requires extra temp non-private resource to create a private resouce with init value.
  -  Why not include MTLDepthStencilState in MTLRenderPipelineState just like D3D12 ?  In metal, it require to set           depth-stencil state and stencil reference value explicit by a render encoder.  
  `[renderEncoder setDepthStencilState:_writeDepthStencilState]; [renderEncoder setStencilReferenceValue:0x10];`

## Present Rendering Result
- How to present rendering results in Metal ? `[commandBuffer presentDrawable:view.currentDrawable];`
  - submission thread will wait this command buffer completed ?
  - how about vsync ?

## Metal Shading Language
- Share the same definitions between Metal CPU code and Metal Shading Language(GPU code).
- How is MSL program compiled and linked ? 
    - Metal provides no explicit compile APIs to do this, instead, it uses external tools to compile and archive them as a shader library.
    - These tools are integrated into Xcode. After archived, Create a Default Library from Device by API `newDefaultLibrary()`.
    - Then Pick Shader Function from within it.
    - You can also create shader library from source code directly, shader compiling is implicitly expressed here. 
- Compared with OGL and D3D11, Metal gives less control, is that a good thing ?
- [MTLFunction](https://developer.apple.com/documentation/metal/mtlfunction?language=objc)
  - A handle to to compiled intermediate Metal Shading code.
  - It contains information of intermediate byte code, function type, vertex attribute and so on.
  - message newArgumentEncoderWithBufferIndex: 
    - Used to create an Argument Buffer Encoder to encode arguments into a MTLBuffer at a certain binding point, the layout of the encoded Buffer is identical to that in Metal Shading Code.
  - MTLFunction is something like a bridge between Metal Shading Code and Objective-C.
  - There is **NO** such mechanism in D3D11.
  - **MTLArgumentEncoder** This type maybe tightly coupled with MTLFunction
    - Encode Resource bindings and Store them in an Argument Buffer(MTLBuffer).
    - Supported bings: Buffer, Texture, Sampler, Render Pipe State, Constant Data, ICB.
- MTLFunctionConstantValues
  - control function by a dynamic way. CPU manipulates GPU resources.

## Indirect Command Buffer
- [MTLIndirectCommandBuffer](https://developer.apple.com/documentation/metal/mtlindirectcommandbuffer?language=objc)
  - It is a GPU Device Resource, It is neither different from MTLBuffer nor MTLTexture.
  - It stores encoded GPU Commands by CPU or GPU
    - They are **Indirect Commands**, represented by Metal class **MTLIndirectRenderCommand**.
    - These commands are executed from Compute Shader. So GPU can issue draw calls by itself in this way.
